Before we continue looking
at the interfaces and
classes in the collections framework,
it's worth covering the comparable and
comparator interfaces or
comparator interfaces.
Now the collections framework includes
classes that sort the relevance,
to really use those properly we need to
understand how that works in order to
create our own classes that we can use or
we could store in sorted collections Now,
in the previous videos,
we implemented the comparable interface,
so that we could experiment with
the collections.sort and reverse methods.
So you've already seen how easy it is
to create the one required method of
the interface.
Which, of course,
was the compare to method.
So we'll continue using
the theater example,
because the seats give us a reasonably
sized data set to play with.
And secondly, because it's regenerated
next to theater's class constructor.
So it's actually less typing.
Now we've left a lot of unnecessary
code in there though so what we'll do is
we'll start cleaning things up a little
bit to make these a little bit tidier and
I have to say that I've been guilty
of bad practice in the past so
we've made the seat collections object
public, I talked about the reasons why.
We did that in the previous video and
of course that was because it's easier to
see what we're dealing with, whether the
actual seats collection without confusing
things by having to get a get or
return the list of seats, etc.
But that's really bad practice so
for the remaining examples we'll
set it back to private and
we'll use a proper get seats.
Method to do so.
So we go back to the theater class now and
firstly we're going to make sure
that seats variable is private.
So down here we're gonna change or up here
the public definition back to private.
And we should still be using
an array list, which we are.
And yeah.
The thing we could do,
if you remember, we copied and
paste the code from the Java sort method
itself from the collections framework.
We're gonna take it back and put back in
it our original binary search code again
that we originally came up with even
though it wasn't terribly efficient.
But we'll put that back in,
replacing this code there.
And what I did was I introduced another
variable here, so consequently,
that constructor's not working, so what
we're going to do is introduce a field
called price, and we'll modify the
constructor to allow that to work as well.
So we're going to go down
to our seat definition,
and we'll make that private as well,
and we set that to public and So
we're going to also add the variable
price probably double price.
Then we'll change the constructor as well.
So the constructor accepts that as
the primary as well it's a double price.
Oops wrong method.
Of course it's a constructor
I was trying to do.
So double price and we'll do this
stop price equals price Like so.
The other thing we're going to do is
to add that getter we talked about.
The getter for the seats because
we haven't got tha public anymore.
So we do getter and we've already got
one of course because we called this
get seats which was for our testing.
What we'll do is we'll
change this definition now.
We'll change it to a collection.
Seat and then we're gonna just return,
instead of doing that loop we will
return seats, like so.
And down on the bottom we've also
of the inner class, the seat class.
You come together for
C number that's also add together for
our pross what we just added pross sp
clean up code on the bottom we move
all those extra spaces down okay so
finally lets go back and
look at the theater class again
which is the constructor.
Cuz we've got an error
there as you can see there.
Now the constructor at the moment
doesn't deal with price at all.
So let's look at changing that.
So what we're going to do is,
we've got the same code in
here that does the generation.
So the first bit of code here We're gonna
charge a different price depending on what
level, so we're gonna set a price of
$12 for seats but if the seats are near
the middle of the first three rows
the price increases to 14 and seats in
the back two rows are on the edges of the
theater only cost $7 so let's go ahead and
change that code so when we go through
our four loop like we've done there.
And then we need to put
a few tests in here so
we're gonna start off with a price
of 12 so double price equals $12.
12.00 and we'll put an if test in there so
if If((row
less than 'D') and remember the first
3 rows says A, B and C and
we're gonna charge a separate
price of 14 for, we're gonna put
&&(seatnum >= 4) And
seat num is less than equal to nine,
sorry, less than equal to nine,
and we're going to make price equals 14,
so let's those first three rose,
and obviously ignore Or
in the three seats on the edges.
If you're on those first few rows and
you're not on the edges, then you're going
to pay $4 million, because that's
considered a premium sort of seat, and
otherwise, getting towards the back,
so if row is greater than F,
the F row, or the seat num < 4,
so again we're on an edge, or seatNum > 9.
So in those cases you're
gonna get a discount.
The price is going to be $7.
Then what we need to do then is for
our constructor
because we changed the constructor for
seat we need to add the price to it and
parse that through which ultimately
is gonna be saved in the seat object.
So you can see what we've done there,
we've again what we've done is we've set
the base price of $12 for
the seats as you can see that on line 18.
But if the seats near the middle of the
first three rows, the price increases 214.
And you can see that we
started doing that on line 20.
However, seats in the back two rows or on
the edges of the theater only cost seven.
So edges is defined as
the first three seats.
Actually the first three
seats on the left hand side.
Remembering that their
numbers have 012 and
the last three seats on
the right-hand side.
If that's the case then
you pay only $7 for it.
So now that we've done all that,
we should be able to start
experimenting with our changes.
So what I'm gonna do,
we've got a lot of coding here.
The main class does contain a lot
from our earlier experimentation.
So what I'm gonna do is delete all but
the initial reservations part, and
then the printList method
itself is gonna stay there.
So I'm gonna delete the sortList,
which we don't need.
I'm also gonna delete some
of this extra code up here.
Really, the only things we wanna
keep is the initial reservations.
And we'll change this
reference from the rail list.
We're not going to be using that anymore.
And we're gonna change this seat copy,
because that doesn't exist anymore.
Instead, we're going to do theater, or
if, actually, delete that entire line,
because the other code is
actually already there.
And change that to private.
I should really go back and
change that because we're gonna still be
using that print list to public again.
That's the seat in a class.
So I'll change that to a public,
but not the seat objects or
list of objects in the array list
that's still going to be private.
So this one's going to be public, so
we can access that class From main,
like so, and just to be different,
we'll do another seat number, D12.
D12, and
we'll put another one there as well.
Now, let's just do, say, B 3rd N.
Okay, it's going to kink,
give us an error, B 3rd N.
Okay, so that's our basic code now.
Let's also now change the price.
For the print what we'll do is
we'll add a price in there.
At the moment we've got it printing
the seat number let's also
print our the price.
So it'll be plus space plus,
and it will be seat.getprice.
So let's just run a couple
of these scenarios and
check that the price is
going to be correct.
And I've got an extra bracket in there,
probably from some of the code I was
deleting when I was
cleaning up a little bit.
Okay, so we can just run that
to confirm it's working.
Please pay for D12.
There's no seat D13.
And obviously if we run this again,
copy that again, the second time it should
come up and say that's already reserved.
See it already reserved.
So, it's working back again how it
should have worked in the past.
And, in terms of how it worked,
because the seat class itself implements
comparable, we have to override
the compare to method.
And that's often a very
simple thing to do.
So a compare to method should
return a number less than zero
if the object should sort less than
the object that is being compared to.
And if we have a look back at our theater
code Looking at the compareTo method
there on line 63, it's seat in our example
which was passed to this method and
then it should return a number
greater than zero if we should sort
greater than the objects
that's being compared to, and
of course if the two objects are equal,
the method needs to return zero.
And because this is exactly what
the string doc compare to function
method does and the string doc compare to
ignore case methods does as well because
that's just the same.
But it's just ignoring the case in letters
of the alphabet we can use that to
implement our comparison You know if you
were creating a compare to method for
a class that's got more than one key
field such as people's names for
example and where you probably wanna sort
first on surname then on first name and
people share the same surname,
you just perform a test of surnames.
And return a negative or
positive number as appropriate.
Then if the surnames are equal, instead of
returning 0 you then test the first name
and return negative, 0, or positive,
depending on how the first names compared.
So in other words, as long as
the Comparator method works as we've
described, the objects implementing
it can be sorted, as we saw.
And again if you go back to our code
just to verify that we can put list
and it's gonna be theater.seats.
Seat I should say reverse seats.
[NOISE]
Your array list of theater.get seats.
Remember we did this previously and
then do collections.reverse.
Reverse seats.
And we're able to printList(reverseSeats).
And by doing that.
We can obviously see now that I've
got the pricing there as well.
We can obviously see now
That the sort is working.
Cuz in this case it's starting now
from the basically the opposite
of the standard sort.
We've done a reversal starting at the
highest element first and working down.
So clearly then what I'm saying is
that the compare to method that's been
implemented currently
is working just fine.
Now with that said, there's also
another way to use the sort method.
And that's [INAUDIBLE] comparator, or
comparator depending on
how you pronounce it.
So it's similar to a comparable.
The comparator interface defines
a single method called compare.
Unlike comparable the objects to be sorted
don't have to implement comparator.
Instead an object of type comparator
can be created with a compare method
that can sort the objects
that we're interested in.
In this case it's seats of course.
And more than one comparator can
be created and it allows for
objects to be sorted in different
ways which is pretty cool.
So we can either create a comparator
object within an existing class.
Or we could create a new class of
implements that compare at our interface.
So let's have a go at the first way using
anonymous in a class within theatre.
So we're gonna go back to our theatre
class which we're already on and
just up here right at the top I'm
going to add static final comparator.
This is going to be sate and
procc is what we're going to call it and
its new compritor and you can see
it automatically come out the cole.
And show us what we need to override and
what we're going to do is change
the references there from 0 1 to S 1 its
a little bit more reading we're now c1
lets actually call it C it should be C1.
C2.
Instead of returning zero,
we need to actually add this
to check particular field,
so what we're gonna do in this one
is we're gonna check the price so
we're gonna sort another In other
words by the price of the tickets or
the seats, so we're gonna put if
S1.get price is less than S2.getprice.
seat two I should say,
then we're gonna return negative one.
Else if s one dot get price
is greater than s two or
c two dot get price, we're
going to return one otherwise of course
they're equal so we're gonna return zero.
So that's how simple that
compared method can be.
Now, just to be clear what
we're doing on line 12.
It may look like we're instantiating
the compare router interface.
But remember from section ten that it's
an anonymous inner class implementing
compare writer,
and it's providing an implementation
of the single compare method.
And as you saw the compare method
itself is fairly straight forward.
It has to return the same
results as the method does
as we've previous
discussed in other words.
Negative if seed one is less than
seed two, zero if the recall, and
of course Was positive is seat
1 is greater than seat 2.
Now is that said meth is a serious
problem with this method and
contenti comparator please make
sure you finish this lecture first
because I'm gonna be discussing
the problem soon because.
If it was something major,
you need to be aware of.
So to see this in action, what we'll
need to do is create a new array.
This was seats, and we need to
add a couple of seats to list and
then we need to sort them price,
with the cheapest seats first.
By parsing our new added
to collections.sort method.
So let's go and do that.
So we;ll go back to main.
And just down here,
what we'll do is we'll add a new
list here and a new list of seats and
new list theater dot seat.
It's going to be price
seat equals URA list, and
it's going to be theater dot get
seats which we've done before.
So we've got a copy of our elements now.
So what we're going to do is
actually add a couple of seats.
We move priceSeats.add, you'll see
why in a minute, .theatre.new Seat.
And remember the weird syntax
to instantiate an class.
"b00" and we'll call it 13.00 for
the price.
And then priceSeats.add.
theatre.new making it Seat using that
weird inner class to make a constructor
A zero zero and thirteen as well.
Next we'll do the sort.
So we can do that by
typing collections .sort,
and it's gonna be priceSeats, which is
obviously the list we wanna sort on.
And it's gonna be Theatre.PRICE_ORDER.
So we're passing in again, just to go
back to make sure that it was clear.
Comparator as well, and that's our
Comparator in there which we created,
which of course was PRICE_ORDER.
And now if we print the list after that,
priceSeats.
You can see what's happened.
Just to make this clear
with the readability,
I'll put a dollar sign just so
we know that that is a price.
Let us now try running that.
And actually I'm gonna be paying
attention so we'll try that again.
And obviously another problem here.
Actually that should've been a semicolon.
Because we've got now, Comparator,
and I need to have a semicolon
to finish off that definition.
The third time lucky,
we'll try running that again now.
And you can see that's
a little bit better now.
And we'll just give myself a bit of space.
Looking at the last entry.
Now the seats are listed in price order.
And it's worth noting that sort routines
used is guaranteed to be stable.
What that means is that the elements won't
be swapped if they don't need to be.
So that all seats with the same
price appear in seat number order.
And that's because how they're in to you
C also appeared in the original order so
B is your 0 before it
becomes 8 0 0 because
that's the order it adds to the list so
if we go back and have a look.
Again this is in price order.
So we need to arrive to
the end to see those entries.
Which has a price of 13.
And then you can see b then a 13.
And again b00 comes before a00
because that's the order they're added
to in the list.
So going back to the code.
We added that entry first line 36,
B before A, and again the way
this sort routine works, elements aren't
swapped if they don't need to be.
So in this case, we're looking in the
comparator which is purely based on price.
We go back and check that out again.
We're just doing a comparison just on
price, which of course is why Is not
looking at the seat number to determine
any sort of sort criteria and again
the way it works is, if they are equal,
the price was equal, they don't get moved
of course that helps performance by not
moving things unless you really have to.
So it's.
We've still got a lot to talk about.
Now we can add as many
comparators as we want and so
we could include one to list the highest
price seats first, for arguments sake.
So the comparator doesn't
have to be static but
it makes it easy to use if we don’t need
a class instance In order to use it.
Now, this example,
as you can see on line 38,
we made the comparator study
variable with the theater class,
and that's because the theater class
is controlling all excess seats.
But thinking about it,
it could have made more sense to
include it in the seat class itself.
Now, instead,
especially if seat was now an inter class.
But had we done that there would have
been no seat in sense available in main
to call on.
So static would for
that reason be a lot more convenient.
And just as a digression before we look
at the problem with our compare adders
compare method there's
an interesting suggestion IntelliJ
makes about the compare adder.
So clicking on its definition
in the theater class
Intellij will show you how
to suggest a lock popped.
So if we go back and do that so
if we click the definition
You can see that Intellijay's
coming out with a couple of ideas.
The one here that is interesting is split
into declaration and initialization so
we'll go ahead and accept that
suggestion just to see what happens.
We'll click on that and
you can see what's happened there.
Declaration of price order becomes
a standard final declaration.
But Intellijay then inserts
a static initialization block.
Into the code that initializes
the price order comparator.
And we only recently discussed
static initialization blocks so
it's quite good to see a practical use on
it as you can see in this scenario here.
Okay so I'm gonna end the video here.
I was gonna talk about the final
issue with the compare method but
we'll leave that to the next video
given how long this video has gone for.
So we'll see you in the next video.